BM Granite models are not just AI-driven tools. They are a group of highly specialized large language models, specifically designed for code generation tasks, such as fixing bugs, explaining code, and documenting code. Icon of AI surrounded by logos of programming languages such as Python, JavaScript, C++, and HTML surrounding it Large language models (LLMs) are powerful AI systems capable of understanding and generating human language by processing vast amounts of text data. These models are extensively trained on code written in 116 programming languages. This depth of training equips them to generate precise, accurate code with the required syntax variations. Let’s learn how these models work to transform the code generation process. How do IBM Granite models work? Granite models use machine learning and natural language processing to handle specific code generation tasks. Select each section to learn how Granite models streamline code generation. Machine learning IBM Granite models use machine learning to train on billions of lines of code. Through this process, these models learn common patterns and best practices, enabling them to generate functional code optimized for both efficiency and reliability. For example, if you provide data on customer behavior, the model identifies trends and generates predictions to enhance decision-making. The following graphic illustrates how Granite models first process huge data sets of code, then identify the patterns based on that data, and finally generate a functional code. Illustration showing how Granite models use machine learning to first process huge data sets of code, then identify the patterns based on that data, and finally generate a functional code. Natural language processing IBM Granite models interpret natural language instructions and convert them into precise code. This feature enables seamless execution and improves accessibility for developers. For example, if you instruct the model to create a function that calculates the sum of an array of numbers, the model understands your instruction and generates the required code from scratch. The following graphic illustrates how Granite models first process natural language instructions, then interpret them, and finally generate a precise code. Illustration showing how Granite models first process natural language instructions, then interpret them, and finally generate a precise code. By combining machine learning to recognize patterns with natural language processing to interpret instructions, Granite models offer a comprehensive solution for generating precise, functional code.ypes of Granite models used for code generation The family of Granite models has two types: Granite Base models and Granite Instruct models. Let’s explore both in detail. Granite Base models Granite Base models form the foundation of code-related tasks. They are the baseline models that enable developers to automate routine tasks and focus on strategic problem solving. These models support developers with the following tasks: Generating new code Debugging existing code Offering clear explanations for complex code IBM Granite Base models come in four sizes. Select each marker (+) on the following graphic to learn about the four sizes of Granite Base models. A diagram displaying the four sizes of IBM Granite Base models. These models are 3B, 8B, 20B, and 34B. While the Base models are effectively trained for code generation, the Instruct models are capable of handling more complex coding tasks. Granite Instruct models Granite Instruct models build on the Base models by adding a layer of precision for following instructions. This means Instruct models understand and execute tasks with high accuracy. These models support developers with the following tasks: Automating complex instruction-based tasks Using multiple sources for code generation Analyzing complex code issues IBM Granite Instruct models also come in four sizes. Select each marker (+) on the following graphic to learn about the four sizes of Granite Instruct models. A diagram displaying the four sizes of Granite Instruct models. These are 3B, 8B, 20B, and 34B. Each of these models adds value to the code generation process in different ways. Let’s compare them to help you determine which model is more suitable for your project. Granite Base versus Granite Instruct models The following table compares the Base models and the Instruct models. Their features help you choose the model that best fits your coding needs. Feature Granite Base models Granite Instruct models Purpose Generating code Fixing and repairing bugs Following general and specific instructions Automating tasks from human language instructions Model sizes 3B, 8B, 20B, and 34B 3B, 8B, 20B, and 34B Key use cases Documenting and explaining code Translating instructions into functional code Best used for Streamlining code-heavy tasks Automating workflow-based tasks Memory and power needs Scaling as per model size Scaling based on task complexity Sample use case Modernizing legacy systems Automating Git commit-based updates Now, it’s time to practice what you’ve learned!IBM Granite models offer distinct advantages compared to other generative AI models. Purposefully crafted with features that enhance integration, security, and developer support, these models surpass their competitors. Select each card to explore the advantages of using Granite models. Front of card Graphic showing an interconnected system of computers Click to flip Back of card Granite models integrate seamlessly with the IBM ecosystem and enable developers to work with tools such as IBM watsonx Code Assistant for addressing specific coding needs. Click to flip Front of card Graphic of a shield icon with a tick mark in the center Click to flip Back of card Granite models are built for critical enterprise needs such as security and compliance. Developers can run them on a private cloud or on-premises servers, which ensures that data stays secure. Click to flip Front of card Graphic of an icon of a folder along with a magnifying glass Click to flip Back of card Granite models provide developers with robust support and resources backed by a vast knowledge base refined through decades of enterprise experience. These models provide comprehensive documentation resources to help optimize the coding journey. Click to flip Front of card Graphic of an icon of a gear with nodes coming out of it Click to flip Back of card Granite models have advanced generative AI capabilities that offer superior accuracy in code generation. Developers can use these models for complex application development, saving time and costs. Click to flip IBM Granite models outperform open-source alternatives As a developer, choosing the right generative AI model for coding is crucial to get the best results. On a range of tests, Granite Base and Granite Instruct models constantly outperform other open-source models, such as Meta Code Llama, Google CodeGemma, and Mistral AI, in the overall software development process. Select each section to review how Granite models rank against other models in performance. Granite Base models versus other models The first three graphs illustrate that IBM Granite Base models outperform other models (Mistral-7B, CodeLlama-7B, CodeGemma-7B, Llama-3-8B, Gemma-7B, and StarCoder2-7B) in generating, explaining, and fixing code. The fourth graph summarizes the average performance of each model based on the data from the first three graphs. Image source: Granite Code Models: A Family of Open Foundation Models for Code Intelligence(opens in a new tab) A diagram displaying how Granite Base models outperform other open-source models such as Mistral-7B, CodeLlama-7B, CodeGemma-7B, Llama-3-8B, Gemma-7B, and StarCoder2-7B in generating, explaining and fixing code. Granite Instruct models versus other models The first three graphs illustrate that IBM Granite Instruct models outperform other models (Mistral-7B, CodeLlama-7B, CodeGemma-7B, Llama-3-8B, Gemma-7B, and StarCoder2-7B) in generating, explaining, and fixing code. The fourth graph summarizes the average performance of each model based on the data from the first three graphs. Image source: Granite Code Models: A Family of Open Foundation Models for Code Intelligence(opens in a new tab) A diagram displaying how Granite Instruct models outperform other open-source models such as Mistral-7B, CodeLlama-7B, CodeGemma-7B, Llama-3-8B, Gemma-7B, and StarCoder2-7B in generating, explaining and fixing code.Benefits of using IBM Granite models Granite models simplify the process for developers to generate, explain, and fix code. But how does this simplification impact the daily work of developers? Let’s find out. Granite models offer five key benefits to developers: 1 Increased efficiency 2 Improved code quality 3 Enhanced collaboration 4 Personalized suggestions 5 Increased accessibility Let’s examine each benefit in detail. Numbered divider 1 Increased efficiency Coding takes time, especially with repetitive tasks such as setting up projects or fixing errors. Granite models increase coding efficiency by: Generating code quickly Automating repetitive tasks Optimizing code for reliability Select each marker (+) on the following graphic to learn where you can use Granite models to increase the efficiency of your coding. Illustration displaying how Granite models increase efficiency by rapid prototyping, generating boilerplate code, and code refactoring and optimization Granite models speed up the coding process so you can focus on exploring new ideas and refining existing projects. Numbered divider 2 Improved code quality Writing good code isn’t just about making it work; it’s about ensuring reliability, readability, and ease of improvement. Granite models help you write better code by following best practices and catching mistakes early. Select each marker (+) on the following graphic to explore how Granite models improve the quality of code. Illustration depicting how Granite models improve code quality by automating error checking, providing feedback for accuracy, and validating code Granite models help you write code that is both functional and polished, whether you’re just starting or working on something complex. Numbered divider 3 Enhanced collaboration Coding is often a team effort, whether you’re working on a personal project with a friend or contributing to a larger application. Granite models make collaboration easier by keeping everyone organized and productive. Select each marker (+) on the following graphic to explore how Granite models enhance collaboration. Illustration showing how Granite models enhance collaboration by integrating with version control tools, ensuring consistent quality, and detecting errors Granite models streamline teamwork by maintaining organized workflows and ensuring consistent coding methods, helping teams deliver better results with less hassle. Numbered divider 4 Personalized suggestions Great tools evolve with their users, and Granite models are no exception. They learn and adapt to different coding styles and give personalized suggestions with every interaction. Select each marker (+) on the following graphic to see how Granite models benefit developers by providing personalized suggestions. Illustration displaying how Granite models learn and adapt to different coding needs by refining suggestions, helping avoid repetitive tasks, and reducing rework. Granite models learn from and adapt to the coding style of developers, making coding faster, smarter, and more intuitive at every step of the process. Numbered divider 5 Increased accessibility You don’t need to be a coding expert to use Granite models effectively. These models make it easy for expert programmers and non-programmers to create and work with code. Select each marker (+) on the following graphic to explore how Granite models make coding accessible to non-programmers. Illustration displaying how Granite models make coding accessible by automating coding tasks, creating quick prototypes, and simplifying documentation. Granite models make coding accessible to everyone, whether you want to automate tasks, prototype ideas, or document code. These models simplify programming and enables new possibilities for all users. Let’s review a real-life scenario that explains how Granite models are beneficial to developers. Building a smart scheduling tool with IBM Granite models Your team is creating a scheduling feature for a productivity app. Granite models help every step of the way, from writing the first lines of code to launching the feature. Increased efficiency Granite models quickly generate the basic code for the scheduling feature, such as setting up application programming interfaces (APIs) and handling time zone conflicts. This automation allows the team to focus on perfecting the user experience. Personalized suggestions When the team writes the scheduling algorithm, Granite models flag potential bugs, suggest improvements, and check if the code follows best practices. This ensures the feature works smoothly for all users. Enhanced collaboration Granite models integrate with GitHub, ensuring the team works on the same version and maintains consistent code. Granite models adapt to preferences, suggesting improvements for faster, more maintainable scheduling while reducing rework. Increased accessibility Designers on the team use Granite models to test ideas for the scheduling feature, even if they aren't coding experts. They create quick prototypes that the developers can build on. Improved code quality By using Granite models, the team delivers the scheduling feature on time and with fewer mistakes, ensuring the code is more polished and reliable for users. Granite doesn't just help developers code; it makes the whole process better for everyone involved. Now, it’s time to practice what you’ve learned!Even well-written code can have errors or unforeseen issues. Errors, whether in manually written code or AI-generated outputs, can lead to bugs, incorrect results, or programs that fail to run. That’s where troubleshooting helps in the software development process. Troubleshooting is the process of finding and fixing problems in code to ensure it runs correctly. When you troubleshoot code, you begin looking at error messages to understand what’s wrong. Next, you check if the program’s logic makes sense and watch how variables change while the program runs. You also test different scenarios to ensure the code works in all cases. This is the goal of troubleshooting: to find the root cause of the problem and fix it. Let’s say you are working on a web page and you notice after publishing that an image doesn’t appear. You check your HTML code and discover the image link is broken. After fixing the link, you refresh the page, and the image finally displays properly. Troubleshooting helps developers with the following: Preventing system crashes and slowdowns Making software more dependable by fixing errors Identifying problems early, which saves time Troubleshooting code with IBM Granite models IBM Granite models analyze your code, identify issues, explain them clearly, and offer precise fixes. They simplify troubleshooting and help you resolve bugs efficiently. Select each tab to learn how the two types of Granite models can help with troubleshooting. Granite Base models Granite Instruct models Granite Base models are adept at identifying and repairing code errors, explaining complex code segments, and generating new code solutions. For instance, if a team member experiences recurring system crashes or needs to expand certain functionalities the Base models quickly idenitfy issues, fix code errors, and generate new code solutions. To troubleshoot effectively with Granite models, you’ll first learn about identifying the problems you need solve in your code. Let’s read about these code-related issues in detail.Granite Instruct models simplify troubleshooting by performing targeted code fixes, debugging issues, or providing clarifications by using insights gained from diverse code instruction datasets. For instance, if the instruction is to make the login process handle high traffic without delays, Granite Instruct models interpret it and implement targeted code changes to improve performance.Whether you write a code manually or use generative AI tools such as IBM Granite models, errors are unavoidable. Even with careful coding, errors can happen because of the complex nature of software development. Familiarize yourself with typical coding errors before troubleshooting with Granite models. Knowing what to look for helps you fix issues more efficiently. Let’s explore some common code-related issues and how to identify them. Syntax errors Icon representing a syntax error in code on a computer screen Syntax errors happen when a code violates the programming language's punctuation rules, such as failing to pair an opening parenthesis with a closing one. These errors can completely stop the program from running. For instance, forgetting to close a parenthesis can trigger a syntax error that halts the entire program. You can identify syntax errors by: Using code editors or integrated development environments (IDEs) Checking for missing punctuation and misspelled words Testing smaller code blocks to isolate errors in larger programs For example, if you are writing code to find the average of three numbers, you write the following code: num1 = 10 num2 = 20 num3 = 30 average = (num1 + num2 + num3 / 3 print ("The average is:", average) In this code, the closing parenthesis is missing. This syntax error stops the program from running because the programming language requires every opening parenthesis to have a matching closing parenthesis. Without fixing the error, the code cannot calculate the average. Logical errors Logical errors are bugs in your code where the program runs but produces incorrect results because the logic of your instructions is incorrect. Imagine you are using a calculator: even when you press the wrong buttons, you get an answer, it just isn't the right one. Icon of an error sign on a computer screen You can identify logical errors in your code by: Comparing outputs with expected results Running your code with different test cases Enabling error messages and warnings Imagine you're writing a program to calculate the total minutes in a given number of hours. You write the following code: def calculate_minutes(hours): return hours + 60 total_minutes = calculate_minutes(5) The function should multiply by 60 to convert hours to minutes, but it incorrectly adds 60 to the hours. The program runs without errors but produces incorrect results due to incorrect logic. To fix it, use the correct logic: hours * 60. Functional errors Icon of an incorrect sign on a computer screen Functional errors are missing or incomplete elements of code that prevent a program from performing its intended tasks correctly. For example, in a user registration system, a functional error occurs when the code fails to check if a username already exists, thereby permitting an unwanted duplicate account creation. You can identify functional errors by: Verifying features against requirements Running the program with varied inputs Testing complex functions in parts Imagine you’re writing code for a school registration system. The program is supposed to add students to a class only if they are not already enrolled. You write the following code: def register_student(student, class_list): class_list.append(student) students = ['Alice', 'Bob', 'Charlie'] class_list = ['Alice', 'Bob'] register_student('Alice', class_list) The program should check if the student is already enrolled before adding them to the class. However, due to the missing check, the program adds “Alice” to the class list again, resulting in a duplicate entry. This demonstrates a functional error, where the program fails to perform its task correctly. The correct code should include a check to prevent duplicate enrollments. No matter how the code is generated, manually or with generative AI tools, these issues are part of the coding process. Recognizing these common coding issues is the first step to efficiently fixing them with tools such as Granite models.Techniques to troubleshoot code using IBM Granite models For developers, troubleshooting often means looking through endless lines of code, hunting for that hidden bug. This can be frustrating, time-consuming, and tedious. Granite models make troubleshooting more efficient for developers by: Identifying potential coding errors Explaining code error messages Fixing coding errors Now, let’s explore how IBM Granite models help in identifying, explaining, and fixing code issues. Identify potential coding errors Spotting errors can be time-consuming, especially in large code bases. Granite scans your code for issues, highlights errors, and points you to the exact lines that need attention. Follow these steps to find coding errors with Granite models: 1 Paste the code snippet in the model. 2 Prompt the model to identify errors in the code. For example, “Your task is to review the provided code and identify errors.” 3 Prompt the model to categorize errors for clarity. For example, “Classify the error into one of the following categories: Syntax Error, Logical Error, or Design Flaw.” Select each section to view some examples of how IBM Granite models identify coding errors. Forgetting a closing parenthesis and indentation in your code To learn about the errors in this incorrect code, prompt the Granite model to identify them. Example prompt: “My code isn’t running at all. Your task is to review this code and find errors in it. Highlight these errors.” After you input the prompt, the Granite model highlights the errors, as shown in this illustration. Graphic showing incorrect code with errors on the left. and on the right, the Granite model highlights the errors, that are the missing parenthesis in line 1 and missing indentation in line 2 Mistyping a variable name in a loop To learn about the errors in this incorrect code, prompt the Granite model to identify them. Example prompt: “My code is not running as intended. Can you review and identify the error in this code? Highlight the error and specify its type.” After you input the prompt, the Granite model highlights the error, as shown in this illustration. Graphic showing incorrect code on the left, where an undefined variable x is printed, and on the right, the Granite model highlights the error as "Undefined variable 'x' (line 2). After identifying errors with Granite models, you can also use Granite models to clarify the meaning of errors and understand them better. Let’s find out how. Explain code error messages Error messages in programming are often complex and filled with technical jargon or abbreviations that confuse those new to coding. This is why interpreters like Granite models are so valuable. These models translate confusing messages into plain language and provide clear steps to fix the issues, making it easier to understand and resolve the problems. When your code does not work, you can: 1 Paste the error message into the chosen Granite model. 2 Prompt the model to explain the code errors. For example, “Provide a clear and concise explanation of the identified issues.” Let’s review this table and see how Granite models explain several types of error messages. Example prompt Code error message Explanation by Granite model Review and explain the error message for the identified syntax error. Ensure your explanations are clear, descriptive, and easy to understand. Syntax error: Unexpected token There is a typo or incorrect symbol in the code. Check punctuation, brackets, or missing semicolons. Review and explain the error message for the identified logical error. Ensure your explanations are clear, descriptive, and easy to understand. Logical error: Incorrect condition The logic in the code isn’t behaving as expected. Review the conditions if statements or loops for potential mistakes. Review and explain the error message for the identified functional error. Ensure your explanations are clear, descriptive, and easy to understand. Functional error: Missing function return value The function is expected to return a value, but it’s missing a return statement or returning “None” unintentionally. Check the function to ensure a proper return value is provided. Review and explain the error message for the identified Name error. Ensure your explanations are clear, descriptive, and easy to understand. Name error: Name 'X' is not defined In Python, the variable or function the code is trying to achieve hasn’t been created or imported. Once you understand the error messages, you’ll resolve them using IBM Granite models. Let’s discover how. Fix coding errors Beyond identifying and explaining coding issues, Granite models can also correct them for you. Manually fixing errors can be tedious, so these models simplify the process by instantly generating accurate fixes when you input the problematic code. When you want to fix bugs in your code, you can: 1 Paste the incorrect code into the chosen Granite model. 2 Prompt the model to fix the identified errors. For example, “Provide a corrected version of the code and recommend improvements, if applicable.” Select each section to view how Granite models can help you fix coding errors. Writing a loop without a colon To fix the errors in this incorrect code, prompt the Granite model to suggest corrections or fix them for you. Example prompt: “Suggest a corrected version of the code that fixes the missing colon in the code.” When you input the prompt, the Granite model fixes the errors, as shown in this illustration. Graphic showing incorrect code with a missing colon on the left, and on the right, the correct code with the colon added by the Granite model. Writing a function with an unnecessary parameter To fix the errors in this incorrect code, prompt the Granite model to suggest corrections or fix them for you. Example prompt: “Provide a fixed version of the code with the ‘age’ error removed from the code.” When you input the prompt, the Granite model fixes the errors, as shown in this illustration. Graphic showing incorrect code with the “age” parameter on the left, and on the right, the correct code with the removed age parameter by the Granite model. Forgetting to return a value in a function To fix the errors in this incorrect code, prompt the Granite model to suggest corrections or fix them for you. Example prompt: “Provide a corrected version of the code that includes the ‘return sum’ function.” When you input the prompt, the Granite model fixes the errors, as shown in this illustration. Graphic showing incorrect code with the missing “return sum” statement on the left, and on the right, the correct code with the added “return sum” statement by the Granite model. Granite models save developers valuable hours, by helping them fix errors in their code, and ensure the execution of a precise code. Let’s review a real-life scenario that explains how Granite models help developers troubleshoot code. Troubleshooting a project management tool with Granite models A project management tool is being developed, and a critical feature, generating project timelines, isn't working as expected. Using Granite models, the team quickly identifies, understands, and fixes the issue. Prompt Granite models to detect errors The timeline generation script produces an error. Instead of manually searching through hundreds of lines of code, the developer pastes the code snippet into Granite models with a simple prompt: "Review this code and identify errors." As a result, the Granite models highlight a missing parenthesis in one function and a mistyped variable name in another section, categorizing the issues as syntax and logical errors, and clearly pointing out what needs attention. Paste the error message into Granite models The developer pastes the error message from the console into Granite models. The message reads, "NameError: Name 'timeline' is not defined." These models explain in plain language: "The variable 'timeline' has not been declared or imported. Check for typos or missing imports." This explanation clears up the confusion and directs the team to the root cause. Prompt the Granite models to fix the errors The developer prompts Granite models to fix the errors with the prompt, "Fix these issues and suggest improvements." These models correct the missing parenthesis, update the variable name, and optimize the code for better readability, returning a polished version of the script, which the team implements immediately. Efficient troubleshooting and project recovery With Granite models, the entire troubleshooting process, identifying bugs and fixing errors become quick and stress-free. The project is back on track, saving hours of effort and allowing the team to focus on refining other features. Now, it’s time to practice what you’ve learned!3 Granite models offer several benefits, including: Increased efficiency Improved code quality Enhanced team collaboration Personalized suggestions Increased accessibility 4 Using IBM Granite models in IBM watsonx Prompt Lab, make troubleshooting more efficient for developers by helping them identify, explain, and fix errors in their code. Learning objectives Now that you’ve completed this module, you should be able to: • Identify the types of IBM Granite models used for code generation • Describe the benefits of using IBM Granite models for code generation • Identify the techniques to troubleshoot codeKey concepts 1 IBM Granite models are specialized large language models for generating, explaining, and fixing code. Granite models use machine learning and natural language processing to address a developer’s specific coding needs. 2 IBM Granite offers Base models for code generation and bug fixing, and Instruct models for following detailed instructions and automating workflows. Each type includes models of various sizes including the 3B, 8B, 20B, and 34B models. 3 Granite models offer several benefits, including: Increased efficiency Improved code quality Enhanced team collaboration Personalized suggestions Increased accessibility 4 Using IBM Granite models in IBM watsonx Prompt Lab, make troubleshooting more efficient for developers by helping them identify, explain, and fix errors in their code. Learning objectives Now that you’ve completed this module, you should be able to: • Identify the types of IBM Granite models used for code generation • Describe the benefits of using IBM Granite models for code generation • Identify the techniques to troubleshoot code